{% if include.perspective == "third" %}
{% assign fp = false %}
{% else %}
{% assign fp = true %}
{% endif %}

{% if fp %}I am{% else %}Dr. Ben Swift is{% endif %} an
internationally-recognised interdisciplinary
[scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=OQdYgLEAAAAJ) and
electronic/computer music artist. He is currently the Associate Director
(Education) and [Educational Experiences
lead](https://cybernetics.anu.edu.au/people/ben-swift/) in the [School of
Cybernetics](https://cybernetics.anu.edu.au/) at the [Australian National
University](https://anu.edu.au). {% if fp %}I'm{% else %}He's{% endif %} an
expert in computational art & music, AI/machine learning, computing education,
user experience (UX) design, and cybernetics.

{% if fp %}I am{% else %}Ben is{% endif %} a founder and co-director of the [ANU
Laptop Ensemble](https://comp.anu.edu.au/courses/laptop-ensemble/), an
interdisciplinary research and teaching collective which specialises in _making
things_ which explore the way that **code** (software), **creativity**
(especially the arts) and **culture** (life) intersect in the modern world.

As a [livecoding artist]({% link livecoding.md %}) {% if fp %}I have{% else
%}Ben has{% endif %} performed at international arts festivals, including the
[International Symposium on Electronic Art](https://www.isea-web.org) (ISEA) and
the [International Conference on Live Coding](https://iclc.toplap.org) (ICLC).
{% if fp %}I'm{% else %}He's{% endif %} the Vice President of the [Australasian
Computer Music Association](https://computermusic.org.au) (ACMA).

{% if fp %}I am{% else %}Ben is{% endif %} a
[maker](https://github.com/benswift) of open-source software tools for music,
creative code, data analysis/visualisation, and more. {% if fp %}I'm{% else
%}He's{% endif %} one half of the core development team for the [Extempore
programming environment](https://github.com/digego/extempore) <a
style="vertical-align: sub;"
href="https://github.com/digego/extempore/stargazers"><img style="width:unset;"
alt="GitHub stars"
src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/digego/extempore"></a> for musical
livecoding. Extempore's users are a worldwide community of programmers, artists,
musicians, and data visualisation practitioners. {% if fp %}I have{% else %}He
has{% endif %} more than 15 years' experience as an OSS community manager,
technical writer, software engineer and creative code outreach ambassador.
