---
date: "2009-07-03"
type: curated
title: "ACMC '09: Australasian Computer Music Conference"
venue: Queensland University of Technology
curator: Andrew Sorensen
artists:
  - Ben Swift
event_url: https://computermusic.org.au/conferences/acmc2009/
venue_url: https://www.qut.edu.au
---

{% asset images/livecoding/ben-acmc-09-closeup.jpg @pic alt="Ben performing at ACMC 09" %}

Here are a few photos of me from the 2009 Australasian Computer Music Conference
in Queensland, Australia. Here's me giving my research talk, entitled
_Distributed Performance in Livecoding_ (there was a paper as well
[swiftDistributedPerformanceLive2009]({{site.baseurl}}{% link research.md
%}#swiftDistributedPerformanceLive2009)).

{% asset images/livecoding/ben-acmc-09-research-talk.jpg @pic alt="Ben giving a research talk" %}

The first photo is from my livecoding set later in the night (the main
event---the research talk was just a talk about the infrastructure I was using
in this set).

The cool thing about this gig was that I'd written a companion iPhone app, so
that I could choose certain parameters & program structures in my code, and push
them out to audience members (on the fly) so that they could take over
controlling those parameters. Here's a shot of folks hopefully enjoing the set:

{% asset images/livecoding/ben-acmc-09-crowd-shot.jpg @pic alt="crowd shot from ACMC distributed livecoding gig" %}

Sadly, no video recordings survived from this gig. Just as well, actually,
because I had a resource leak in my networking code which ended up making the
whole system unresponsive after about 10mins of performing. I remember furiously
trying to debug it on-the-fly (the music was still playing, but I couldn't
change anything) but I don't think I managed to salvage it very gracefully. Ah,
livecoding---a good learning experience for sure.

Many thanks to [Andrew Brown](https://twitter.com/algomusic) for (1) taking
these photos and (2) keeping the album online after all these years.[^ab]

[^ab]:

  AB, if you're reading this, I know that you put the photos online under an
  "all rights reserved" rather than CC-BY or something like that, but
  hopefully you don't mind me keeping them here for posterity.
