---
layout: post
title: Centre for the Public Awareness of Code
date: 2018-06-05 09:13
tags: ccc
---

_What's your favourite movie?_ Most folks already have an answer to this
question (because they've been asked before). Mine's [The
Castle](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118826/).

{% include assets/picture.html file="images/posts/the-castle.jpg" alt="Cast of 'The Castle'" style="width:100%;" %}

_What's your favourite band/album?_ Again, a pretty standard "dinner party" line
of questioning. As a muso (at least in the loose sense of the word) I find this
a much tougher one to answer, partially because I have so many favourites, and
partially because I'm trying t

_What's your favourite scientist or scientific theory/fact?_ This one is harder,
but thanks to great work by many
[gifted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Sagan) [science](http://drkarl.com/)
[communicators](https://twitter.com/ANU_CPAS) people increasingly have an answer
to those questions.

**_What's your favourite bit of (software) code? What's your favourite
algorithm?_** I reckon that most people will struggle to have an answer for this
one. In fact, most folks probably won't understand the question. Yet code (and
the algorithms they manifest) _does_ impact the world today. Mark Zuckerberg is
still
[travelling](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2018/04/11/zuckerberg-facebook-hearing-congress-house-testimony/)
[around](http://www.latimes.com/business/technology/la-fi-tn-facebook-zuckerberg-europe-20180522-story.html)
with a suit and a haircut apologising for the way his code changed the course of
history. It also true that a naive "code doesn't kill people; people kill
people" techno-dualism doesn't really stack up in practice. The modern world is
a complex, socio-technical assemblage (a glorious hot mess!) and everything
affects everything else.

This isn't about setting up a dichotomy between those who "get" code and those
who don't, and it certainly isn't about adding a moral dimension to code
literacy (so that if you don't code, you're a bad person). There are some
amazing code communicators out there---check out Dan Shiffman on the [Coding
Train](http://thecodingtrain.com/). And there's stuff like [Critical Code
Studies
(CCS)](http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/electropoetics/codology),
although that's more about understanding code-as-text _deeply_ rather than
raising awareness of what code is currently doing in the world.

What we need is a **Centre for the Public Awareness of Code**, with a bunch of
folks doing for code/software/algorithms what Carl Sagan did for space science
with [Cosmos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmos:_A_Personal_Voyage). I've got
some ideas about how we could do it ([musical
livecoding](https://vimeo.com/269115310) is one of them) but I'm sure there are
other ways as well.

I know that there are a lot of people (and organisations) who are working hard
at this problem right now, all over the world. Which angles are they attacking
the problem from? Who's doing it best? What can we all learn from each other?
Let's discuss on [twitter](https://twitter.com/benswift) :)
