---
title: ACMC '20 submissions now open
tags: gigs acma livecoding
---

Good news everyone; we're hosting the annual [Australasian Computer Music
Conference](https://acmc2020.com/) (ACMC) at the ANU this year from July 8--11.
ACMC is a festival of gigs, talks, installations and hands-on tutorials designed
to inspire, challenge, and showcase the computer music community. There's lots
more information on the [conference website](https://acmc2020.com/).

{% include assets/picture.html file="images/posts/acmc-2019-allsop-gig.jpg" alt="live computer music & visuals at ACMC'19" %}

{:.hl-para}

The call for submissions---papers, artist talks, performances, workshops,
tutorials and more---[is now
open](https://acmc2020.com/#/features/03-submission).

## Who's it for, and why should you come?

Sure, it's hosted at an academic institution, but ACMC isn't just for
professors. This year's conference theme is **inclusion**, and so we're trying
really hard to make it easy for _all_ folks who love making noise with
computers, especially those who are often locked out of these sorts of events
for various reasons. We're offering free/cheap conference tickets and even
scholarships to make that happen.

So, if you're reading this and you have some sort of creative practice which
involves computers/technology and sound/music, then I'd _love it_ if you'd apply
to come and show us your stuff. If you're worried that your stuff is suitable,
then (1) it probably is, and (2) I'm really happy to discuss it with you to help
you figure out how best to participate---just [send me an
email](mailto:ben.swift@anu.edu.au).

If you're not interested in submitting your own work, then mark those dates
(July 8--11) in your diary and stay tuned for when we release the program. We're
also going to be running a bunch of workshops in the days before & after the
conference, so this could be your chance to start making music with computers
like you've always dreamed of ðŸ˜Š
