---
title: Configuring Spacemacs org-roam & org-noter for academic writing bliss
tags: research emacs
---

I've always had a decent memory, and so I've never really had a formal system
for keeping track of who said what and in which paper. When it comes time to
write something of my own I end up mostly just going from memory and
re-[google-scholaring](https://scholar.google.com) things from scratch (often
finding later that I already had that paper in my
[Zotero](https://www.zotero.org) database already). As I get older my memory
isn't as sharp, so I think it's time to use a more systematic workflow for
writing---keeping notes about stuff I've read & linking the ideas together.

All the cool kids are raving about the [Zettelkasten](https://zettelkasten.de)
method, and the [org-roam](https://www.orgroam.com) package supporting this
workflow in [Emacs]({{ site.baseurl }}/blog/tag/emacs/). There are also
extensions for managing one's paper library
([org-roam-bibtex](https://github.com/org-roam/org-roam-bibtex)) and
reading/annotating pdf files
([org-noter](https://github.com/weirdNox/org-noter)). When combined, this all
seems like having academic writing superpowers compared to my "sit around and
hope I remember the reference" approach. See e.g. [Noorah Alhasan's EmacsConf
2020 talk](https://emacsconf.org/2020/talks/17/) for more detailed info on this
workflow.

{:.hl-para}

This post isn't about how I've become amazingly productive; it's about how I
wasted a day yak-shaving just to get the software working ðŸ™ƒ

## Getting it all to play nicely in Spacemacs

[Spacemacs](https://www.spacemacs.org) (currently) has good
[org-mode](https://orgmode.org) support, but only rudimentary org-roam support,
and doesn't include the org-roam-bibtex and org-noter extensions. So I spent
some time yesterday setting it all up. There were a couple of
[blog](https://philipperambert.com/Installing-Org-Roam-Bibtex-In-Spacemacs)
[posts](https://www.ianjones.us/org-roam-bibtex) which were helpful, as well as
the GitHub READMEs of the various packages---and you should check them out, this
post isn't meant to be a standalone "here's everything you need" guide. But all
the info I could find only covered _some_ of the parts I wanted (e.g. using
org-roam-bibtex but not org-noter, or using all the parts I wanted but for
[Doom](https://github.com/hlissner/doom-emacs) rather than Spacemacs). So if
you're trying to do the same thing as me this post will (hopefully) save you
some time.

I'm still tinkering with things, so if you want to see the latest version of my
config then have a look at my public dotfiles repo (especially
[`.spacemacs`](https://github.com/benswift/.dotfiles/blob/master/spacemacs) and
[`ben-utils.el`](https://github.com/benswift/.dotfiles/blob/master/ben-utils.el)).

First, make sure you've got the `org` and `bibtex` layers installed, and you'll
need these extra packages in `dotspacemacs-additional-packages`:

- `org-roam-bibtex`
- `org-noter`
- `org-noter-pdftools`

You'll also need to provide some extra layer `:variables` to the associated layers in
`dotspacemacs-configuration-layers` (you could probably do this in config hooks
or even in `spacemacs/user-config` as well---this is just how I did it).

```scheme
(bibtex
 :variables
 bibtex-completion-bibliography (expand-file-name "~/Documents/org/zotero.bib")
 bibtex-completion-pdf-field "file"
 ;; org-ref stuff (but used by bibtex layer)
 org-ref-default-bibliography (list bibtex-completion-bibliography)
 org-ref-get-pdf-filename-function 'org-ref-get-pdf-filename-helm-bibtex)

(org
 :variables
 org-directory (expand-file-name "~/Documents/org")
 org-default-notes-file (concat org-directory "/inbox.org")
 ;; org-roam
 org-enable-roam-support t
 org-roam-directory (concat org-directory "/roam")
 org-roam-db-location (concat org-roam-directory "/db/org-roam.db"))
```

{:.hl-para}

Note: those first two config variables (the `bibtex-completion-*` ones) weren't
listed in the blog posts I found, but seemed to be necessary to get
[helm-bibtex](https://github.com/tmalsburg/helm-bibtex) to find my master
reference file.

Finally, since org-roam-bibtex, org-noter and org-noter-pdftools aren't
Spacemacs layers (they're just additional packages) you need to provide some
extra configuration in `spacemacs/user-config` to hook it all together. For
convenience I put it in a separate `.el` file which I load from
`spacemacs/user-config`.

```scheme
(use-package org-roam-bibtex
  :after org-roam
  :hook (org-roam-mode . org-roam-bibtex-mode)
  :custom
  (orb-preformat-keywords '("citekey" "title" "url" "author-or-editor" "keywords" "file"))
  (orb-process-file-keyword t)
  (orb-file-field-extensions '("pdf" "epub" "html"))

  (orb-templates
   '(("r" "ref" plain (function org-roam-capture--get-point)
      ""
      :file-name "${citekey}"
      :head "#+TITLE: ${citekey}: ${title}
#+ROAM_KEY: ${ref}

- tags ::
- keywords :: ${keywords}

* ${title}
  :PROPERTIES:
  :Custom_ID: ${citekey}
  :URL: ${url}
  :AUTHOR: ${author-or-editor}
  :NOTER_DOCUMENT: ${file}
  :NOTER_PAGE:
  :END:"))))

(use-package org-pdftools
  :hook (org-load . org-pdftools-setup-link))

(use-package org-noter
  :after (:any org pdf-view)
  :custom (org-noter-always-create-frame nil))

(use-package org-noter-pdftools
  :after org-noter
  :config
  (with-eval-after-load 'pdf-annot
    (add-hook 'pdf-annot-activate-handler-functions #'org-noter-pdftools-jump-to-note)))
```

Once I've used this system a bit longer and ironed out any kinks I might submit
a dedicated org-roam-bibtex layer to Spacemacs (or add it to the org layer). But
for now I'll just leave it here in case any other Spacemacs users are wondering
how I did it.
