---
title: 'ACMC2020: tools for organising a virtual conference'
tags: web tools
---

I've been a bit quiet on this blog for the last few weeks[^weeks] because I've
been organising [ACMC2020](https://acmc2020.com/): the _2020 Australasian Computer
Music Conference_. From the conference landing page:

> This year's conference theme is **inclusion**. We want to highlight the
> diverse range of people who contribute to Australia's computer/electronic
> music culture but may not normally attend an academic conference, including
> artists and scholars who are young/emerging, from regional/remote areas, who
> have a disability, who are First Nations People, who have low/no income, who
> are engaged in community music making, or who simply work outside of academia
> and mainstream institutions.

Well, the conference is now all done for 2020 (although the videos are still
freely available online; check out our
[keynotes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6muRCIp3Kg&list=PL4_Bp-PE5_5sgaN4pIzrz0KGBn0RXramC)).
It's been a lot of hard work, but the ACMC community are _amazing_, so it's been
pretty fun as well. A special shout out to the rest of the ACMC [organising
committee](https://acmc2020.com/#Organisers) (Charles, Nat, Sia, Kit & Alec) for
all their hard work---thanks team :) So even though I'm writing this blog post,
these decisions & reflections are really the result of our combined labour, as
well as feedback from the ACMC community during the conference.

[^weeks]:
    well, it's actually pretty common that I'm quiet for a few weeks, so I
    guess it's business as usual

{% include toc.html %}

## Tools for running an online conference in 2020

This post isn't about the success (or otherwise) of ACMC2020 as an inclusive,
affirming computer music conference. I care about that a lot, and that post is
in the works, but this isn't it.

Instead, this post is a list of all the tools that we chose to use to put it all
together, and the rationale behind those decisions. There are lots of people all
around the world organising virtual conferences right now, so hopefully writing
down our experiences is helpful.

As the hosts of a virtual ACMC, our priorities were:

1. to minimise the risk technical difficulties, "live" activities were limited
   to those where they add value (for example all talks were pre-recorded &
   watched on YouTube to avoid the technical issues which come with live
   screen-shared zoom presentations)

2. use synchronous communication modes for discussion and q&a, but with
   persistence: leave participants the option of returning to a discussion later
   (or for leaving a question for a presenter in a different timezone, to be
   answered at a friendlier time for them)

3. where possible, use low-cost (because the ACMC doesn't have a huge budget)
   and open-source tools (so that the things we learn can be built upon by
   others)

4. automate all the things; it probably goes without saying if you know me or
   read my blog, but manual work makes me sad and continuous integration
   pipelines make me happy â˜º

{:.hl-para}

**tl;dr** we used [EasyChair](https://easychair.org/) for submissions & peer
review, a [customised version of
ICLR's](https://github.com/australasian-computer-music-association/acmc2020)
website, [YouTube
premiere](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/9080341?hl=en), and
[Discord](https://discord.com/) for text/voice discussion and q&a

### Conference website {#website}

Initially we threw up simple [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) site (hosted using
GitHub Pages) with the basic conference info & Call for Papers. This was
super-easy and did the job through the initial phase of advertising the
conference and drumming up submissions.

Around the time we were finalising the accepted papers & conference schedule,
the ICLR team [posted on HN](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23282113) that
the tooling for their [virtual
conference](https://iclr.cc/virtual_2020/index.html) was newly [available on
GitHub](https://github.com/Mini-Conf/Mini-Conf). We decided to use it as a
starting point for building the ACMC2020 conference website.

The final version of the ACMC site is still live (and will remain so for a while
at least) at <https://acmc2020.com/>, and the [source is up on
GitHub](https://github.com/australasian-computer-music-association/acmc2020) as
well.

{% include assets/picture.html file="images/posts/acmc-website-words-sounds-screenshot.png" alt="ACMC website screenshot" %}

#### Reflections

- in the end I think it looked really great (and we received some [nice
  feedback](https://twitter.com/benswift/status/1280746825637453824) from the
  creators of the template) but it was [a lot of
  work](https://github.com/australasian-computer-music-association/acmc2020/pulse)
  requiring a non-trivial amount of web development experience to get it to that
  point (Charles Martin helped a lot with this)

- a static site which is automatically populated based on data in a CSV or YAML
  file is a good option---it means as long as whatever system you're using to
  organise & schedule the accepted papers can output a `.csv` file you can
  probably make it work with this website template

- if I had my time again, I'm undecided as to whether I'd use the same
  [Mini-Conf](https://github.com/Mini-Conf/Mini-Conf) template as a starting
  point, or just write a new Jekyll plugin which adds similar features (and just
  has a more mature docs/ecosystem for static site building)

### Submissions & peer review {#easychair}

We used [EasyChair](https://easychair.org/) for conference submissions,
partially because the small-ish size of the conference meant that we were able
to sneak in under the limits for their free tier. While the reviewing & final
decisions were done through EasyChair, at the end of that process we exported
all the accepted submissions as a big `.csv` file (which we imported into Google
Docs---see below).

#### Reflections

- since the [ACMA](http://computermusic.org.au/) has its roots in academia, the
  majority of the audience for this conference are familiar with the whole "call
  for papers -> peer review -> notification -> conference attendance" thing,
  however there were certainly people for whom this process was unfamiliar and a
  bit daunting (so we need to provide more guidance for those folks next time)

- EasyChair sucks, but the others ([Precision
  Conference](https://new.precisionconference.com/),
  [CMT](https://cmt3.research.microsoft.com/)) suck too, so I wouldn't strongly
  push people one way on the other on this part of the process---as long as your
  choice allows you to export all accepted submissions & their metadata in some
  sort of machine-readable format (e.g. CSV, YAML)

### Scheduling/programming the sessions {#google-docs}

EasyChair worked fine for distributing the submissions for peer review &
selecting the ones we wanted in the conference. It doesn't really have a nice
story for how to organise those submissions into a coherent conference program.

To do this, we used a shared Google Docs spreadsheet. Starting with the CSV
export from EasyChair, the ACMC committee added columns about which
presentations should go in which sessions and in which order. To get this data
into the [conference website](#website) we needed to manually "Download as
`.csv`", then copy the file into the `sitedata` folder ready to be picked up by
the next build of the conference website.

#### Reflections

- ACMA is lucky that _most_ of our community[^chronodiversity] is based in
  Australia across a relatively small range of timezones---if you're running an
  international conference then you need to think about the chronodiversity of
  your participants when you're scheduling your conference sessions (my
  colleague [Steve Blackburn](https://twitter.com/stevemblackburn) has a
  blogpost in the works about this)

- this step required the most manual work (in particular the manual "Download as
  `.csv`" step) which was certainly a hassle in the early stages of the
  scheduling process when things are changing a lot, however the convenience &
  familiarity of a spreadsheet was a net win

- the [website infrastructure](#website) has a place for putting python scripts,
  and [we used this a
  lot](https://github.com/australasian-computer-music-association/acmc2020/blob/master/scripts/process_videos.py)
  to run consistency checks & other helpful analyses (because checking stuff
  with scripts is way more fun than checking it by eye, and _probably_ a
  time-saver...)

[^chronodiversity]:
    actually, we did have some overseas participants, and the async nature of
    the [Discord chat](#discord) meant that people could mention them in their
    questions in the text chat, and they could log in at a later time to provide
    answers---this worked really well on a few occasions

### Video presentations {#youtube}

All the AV content for the conference was streamed to "attendees" on YouTube.
ACMC isn't a traditional academic conference---there are audiovisual computer
music performances alongside more traditional paper presentations---but we put
everything on YouTube nonetheless.

A couple of the performances were livestreamed, but for the majority of the
conference program participants were asked to submit a video representing their
performance or paper presentation. Then, an [elaborate series of ffmpeg
scripts](https://github.com/australasian-computer-music-association/acmc2020/blob/master/scripts/process_videos.py)[^ffmpeg]
concatenated the videos to produce a single video per session, with consistent
"titlecards" announcing the authors & title of each new video in the session.

Each session video was uploaded to YouTube, and scheduled for "simultaneous
viewing" at the scheduled time using the [YouTube
Premiere](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/9080341?hl=en) feature.
After the Premiere, the videos were (still are) left up on the [ACMC
YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCKK95K68yVuok-qWNS4Z6Jw) for people to
catch up & watch at their leisure.

![ACMC YouTube channel screenshot]({% link assets/images/posts/acmc-youtube-screenshot.png %})

[^ffmpeg]:
    while this worked really nicely in the end, those scripts probably took me
    as much time to get right as the rest of the website stuff combined ðŸ˜ž

#### Reflections

- outsourcing the video delivery to YouTube (who, regardless of what you think
  of their business model, are **really good** at delivering video) saved
  so much stress

- the ability to upload & schedule the video ahead of time but still watch it
  all-together allows for synchronous discussion and q&a amongst attendees

- when the premiere is done, you don't have to "put the videos online for those
  who missed them"; they're already there (which is _so much easier_ than having
  to make talk recordings, edit them together, and then upload them somewhere)

- YouTube's analytics are also really good, if you're into that sort of thing,
  and you even get stuff like half-decent automatic subtitling and other
  accessibility wins

- it's hard to know what sort of viewership counts as "successful", but the ACMC
  conference videos (in total) are currently at 2.2k views and ~500h watch time

- in terms of wranging the videos pre-upload, [`ffmpeg`](https://ffmpeg.org/) is
  _amazing_ for dealing with all the weird audio/video formats that presenters
  will send you, however until you grok that each `ffmpeg` run is actually
  setting up a graph of audio & video sinks, sources & filters you're doomed to
  copy-paste stuff from StackOverflow and then stare in bewilderment at cryptic
  error messages (trust me... I learned this the hard way ðŸ˜¢)
  
- not all presenters[^acmc-presenters] at an academic conference have the skills
  (or the inclination) to create an engaging video of their work, so depending
  on your community you might see the occasional "monotone drone over text
  slides" presentation (but you'd get bad presentations at an in-person
  conference as well)

[^acmc-presenters]: actually, all the ACMC presenters were great this year â˜º

### Q&A and discussion {#discord}

ACMC2020 went all in on text-based chat using [Discord](https://discord.com/)
(we created our own ACMC2020 Discord server and sent an invite link to all
conference participants). YouTube is great for one-way one-to-many broadcasting,
but not so great for two-way communication, and especially not many-to-many
interaction & discussion. And having all the discussion for the whole conference
(with the ability to `@mention` participants across sessions) in one place
helped with the feeling that this was a single event, rather than just a series
of disconnected YouTube videos.

{% include assets/picture.html file="images/posts/acmc-discord-screenshot.png" alt="ACMC Discord channel screenshot" %}

#### Reflections

- live video chat can be great for situations where everyone already knows
  everyone else, but video (and even audio) can be a bit intimidating for
  newcomers to a community, and we wanted to make the q&a as inclusive as
  possible

- we considered Zoom, but it's really a video platform---as a text chat platform
  it's really bad (no persistent discussions, no ability to mention other
  participants, no emoji/reaction gifs, etc.)

- within the ACMC2020 Discord server, we created a separate "channel" for each
  conference session, where the live discussion would happen (all presenters
  would hang out in that channel during the session), but this also allowed for
  persistent session-specific questions to be asked and returned to later with
  more thoughtful answers (or to get around timezone differences)

- [Slack](https://slack.com/) would have probably worked similarly well to
  Discord, but we liked the fact that Discord makes it easy to jump into an
  "audio" chat---this was particularly useful for the keynote q&a sessions where
  the session chair could collate the questions from the text chat, but the
  speaker could respond using audio rather than having to type out their answers

### Going to the pub after the session

Sadly, the ACMC committee never found out a good way of recreating this part of
the usual conference experience at an online conference. Some folks who were
geographically co-located did get together and watch some of the streams
together, but the recent [Melbourne covid19
lockdown](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-07-07/metropolitan-melbourne-suburbs-back-in-coronavirus-lockdown/12431564)
meant that some people couldn't even do that.

#### Reflections

- some aspects of the online conference that I prefer, the ACMC community still
  needs to have some way of getting together in person to solidify the
  relationships which developed over the course of ACMC2020
