---
title: "The leverage of livecoding: understanding and harnessing complex flows of ideas, software and humans"
tags: cybernetics
hidden: true
---

<div class="hl-para" markdown="1">

Here in the [School of Cybernetics](https://3ainstitute.org) we are building our
capability in cybernetics-–-its histories and possibilities–--and working out
how each of us will contribute to the new cybernetics for the 21st Century.

This blog post, written for a general audience, is part of a content development
sprint, written in reponse to the task of developing a short (1000 words)
persuasive argument about the role and value of cybernetics as an approach to
shape futures through and with technology.

</div>

If you follow this blog, you'll know that I'm a [livecoder]({% link
livecoding.md %})---I _code_ (i.e. write computer programs) to make music in a
club setting with an audience that just wants to dance and have a good time.
With the computer code, the thumping music, the dancing humans; there's
certainly a lot of different stuff going on, and so you might find watching a
livecoder in action to be entertaining, or impressive, or bewildering, or all of
the above. In this post I want to use some ideas from cybernetics to give you a
sense for what it _feels like_ I'm doing when I do it, and then to look at all
the things going on in a way which suggests ways to intervene to change the
system for the better, that is, to find ways to put on a better show for the
adoring crowds.

## Livecoder as a system

Cybernetics is all about the looking at and reasoning about **systems** with
_goals_, interacting with and connected to their _environment_ via _feedback
loops_. These sorts of systems exist at all sorts of different scales
(big/small, fast/slow, cheap/expensive, etc.) and they're fractal in nature---it
doesn't matter what level of "magnification" you look at, each component of a
system is itself a system of interacting components, and each system is itself a
component interacting in a larger system. But since that's all pretty abstract,
let's return to the example of the livecoder, where the components of the system
are:

- I start with a full tank of **brain juice** which allows me to work on tricky
  coding problems. But it's mentally taxing. When I'm happy, rested & in the
  zone, I feel like I've got a full tank, but writing code takes mental energy,
  and so writing the code in the performance drains my brain juice until I'm
  cooked, and then I can't write any more code until I recharge.

- To write the **code** I tap my fingers on the keys of my keyboard. I use a
  specialised program for this (i.e. I don't write it in MS Word) which has a
  bunch of features to help, like different colours for the different parts of
  the code (e.g. functions vs variable vs numerical parameter values), and
  auto-completion, and inline documentation/help about the particular bit of
  code that I'm working on. This code is also projected onto a big screen in the
  club so that the dancers can look at it (or not).

- As the code runs, it generates **music**. Different parts of the code are
  responsible for different parts of the music, and I try and give the functions
  & variables in my code human-readable names (like `piano`) so that the
  correspondence between the code and the music is clear-ish. The music will
  only be generated if the code is running nicely (i.e. without bugs/errors) and
  is hooked up to the PA system in the club. If I crash the program (or if
  someone unplugs the PA) then the music will stop.

- The people in the club---people dancing, people chilling at the bar, people
  watching the code on the screen---are collectively having an experience which
  (hopefully) is giving them **good vibes**. Obviously this is a _huge_
  oversimplification, and the extent to which any individual is enjoying
  themselves (and therefore contributing positively to the amount of good vibes
  in the room) depends on all sorts of things. But, in a real sense, the
  creation of **good vibes** in the room is the goal of the live coder---or at
  least it's _my_ goal when I perform in this situtation.

It's a bit clearer to see in a picture:

TODO

So, clearly,

> a livecoder is a machine for turning **brain juice** into **good vibes** (via
> **code** and **music**)

which is a nice way to think about it, and actually is a relatively accurate
picture of what I _feel_ like I'm doing when I'm performing.

## How does cybernetics help us understand this system?
