---
title: Moving to the School of Cybernetics
tags: teaching research cybernetics
hidden: true
---

Some job news---I've just accepted a position in the new [School of
Cybernetics](https://3ainstitute.org) (SoCy) in the ANU College of Engineering
and Computer Science (CECS). I'll finish out my teaching this semester in the
[School of Computing](https://cs.anu.edu.au) then I'll make the move in July.
For those not familiar with the ANU org chart or acronymicon, multiple _Schools_
make up a _College_ (so I'm moving Schools but staying within the College).

I'm really excited by the prospect of designing educational experiences
in/around/through the [new
Cybernetics](https://www.griffithreview.com/articles/touching-the-future/), and
that's what my[^my] team in the SoCy will be doing (under our Director
[Genevieve Bell](https://twitter.com/feraldata)). My work as an
interdisciplinary computer scientist/computer musician has always been
cybernetics-adjacent, and I'm stoked to get a chance to lean in to this
interdisciplinarity as we reimagine what a School (within a College, within a
university) might look like.

[^my]:
    This is "my" in the "team I'm part of" sense, not the "team I lead" sense.
    The new SoCy is going to be a wildly collaborative place, and I'm just one
    part of a multi-talented whole.

However, this decision is bittersweet; I love my current job, my colleagues and
(especially) my students, and I'll be sad to see them less as I move to the
School of Cybernetics. In fact, there are a few things I want to say about this
move, and this blog is as good a place to say them as any.

To **outside observers**, I want to be _super clear_ that I'm not leaving the
School of Computing because it sucks, or because there's no opportunity to do
cool stuff there---quite the opposite. I think the future of computing is bright
at the ANU and I know there are be multiple folks all across the campus working
hard to create that future in the present. To that end, if you're an
up-and-coming creative code researcher/practitioner/educator, then you should
apply for a [tenure-track position in the School of
Computing](https://jobs.acm.org/jobs/computing-tenure-track-faculty-positions-canberra-australian-capital-territory-2601-122695751-d)---it'd
be great to have you join the team, and we'd have chances to work together I'm
sure.

To my **School of Computing colleagues**, I really appreciate your collegiality,
support and friendship over these past nine years (I started as a post-doc on 1
Jan '13). I'll still be around (SoCy will sit in the Birch building), and I'm
keen to be a sounding board or collaborator. There are a few people in
particular who have trained and supported me to be the educator that I am today,
and while I won't do the full "Oscars acceptance speech I'd-like-to-thank-"
thing, I hope you know who you are, and how much I appreciate it.

To the **School of Computing admin team**, you're awesome, and you've been such
a help. I'll miss hassling you on Teams to buy weird gear for the Laptop
Ensemble.

To my **current students**, I (and my new colleagues in SoCy) will make sure you
don't get stuffed around. I'll keep supervising all my current students till
your projects are complete, and you won't notice much difference---just that
from July onwards we might have our meetings in a different building. If you're
in my new [ANU Extension Creative
Computing](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/extn1019/) course, then there's good
news as well---that course will keep going as planned. In fact, it's a high
priority activity for the whole College, and there will be amazing doors that
open up for you through participation in that course. If you're a year 11
student in 2022, you can start thinking about applying to be part of next year's
cohort---[drop me a line](mailto:ben.swift@anu.edu.au) if you'd like some tips
on how to prepare for that process.

To any **prospective/future students** (i.e. those who were hoping to take [one
of my classes]({% link teaching.md %}) in the future) the news is a bit more
mixed. I'll still be involved with the [Laptop
Ensemble](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/comp2710-lens/), and the current plan is
that other courses I've designed & taught (e.g.
[COMP2300](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/comp2300/),
[COMP1720](https://cs.anu.edu.au/courses/comp1720/)) will still continue as
normal with other (excellent!) lecturers. Finally, while I was scheduled to take
over _COMP4610 Computer Graphics_ in S2 2021, this now won't happen. If that
stuffs up your study plans, I'm really sorry.

Finally, while I'm taking on new and exciting responsibilities in the School of
Cybernetics, I'll still be the same person with the same interests, strengths
and weaknesses. So if we're excited about the same things now, chances are we'll
still be excited about the same things into the future---and I hope we have the
opportunity to support one another to pursue those goals.
