---
title: Are you ready for ChatGPT in the classroom this semester?
tags: ai teaching
published: false
---

As I scrolled through my social media feeds over the Christmas break
[I](https://www.ft.com/content/86e64b4c-a754-47d6-999c-fcc54f62fb5d)
[read](https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2022/12/chatgpt-ai-writing-college-student-essays/672371/)
[through](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/dec/04/ai-bot-chatgpt-stuns-academics-with-essay-writing-skills-and-usability)
[several](https://garymarcus.substack.com/p/how-come-gpt-can-seem-so-brilliant)
"what do AI tools like [ChatGPT](https://chat.openai.comhttps://chat.openai.com)
mean for the future of Higher Education" pieces---I'm sure you did as well. I'm
somewhat reluctant to add to that discourse, because most of my thoughts on the
issue have already been made.

I was at a BBQ dinner with a colleague last weekend and our chat turned to
"how's your class shaping up for the coming semester?" They were aware of
ChatGPT and weren't worried about it destroying the fabric of higher education
or anything like that, but they were a bit unsure about if and how they could
make use of it in their class. So here are a few things to think about if you're
in that position. I'm going to use
[ChatGPT](https://chat.openai.comhttps://chat.openai.com) as an example (because
it's the hot one right now), but similar questions apply for any AI content
generation tool, whether for generating text
[images](https://stability.ai/blog/stablediffusion2-1-release7-dec-2022),
[music](https://www.riffusion.com),
[voiceover](https://blog.elevenlabs.io/enter-the-new-year-with-a-bang/) or
[video](https://twitter.com/SmokeAwayyy/status/1613765555768668160).

First, if your class includes student deliverables which involve submitting
written work (e.g. essays, but also process blogs, forum posts and more), some
of your students are going to use ChatGPT to write their submissions. It's
inevitable, and although the NY Schools district is trying to bury its head in
the sand and [ban
ChatGPT](https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/new-york-city-public-schools-ban-chatgpt-devices-networks-rcna64446),
position is (in my opinion) both
[wrongheaded](https://time.com/6246574/schools-shouldnt-ban-access-to-chatgpt/)
and [too difficult to enforce in
practice](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/jan/12/college-student-claims-app-can-detect-essays-written-by-chatbot-chatgpt).

So, as you look over your course outline and assessment schedule you need to ask
yourself whether you care if your students use ChatGPT. It's a question that
goes to the heart of why we set deliverables at all, which includes reasons like
[legal
compliance](https://www.teqsa.gov.au/guides-resources/resources/guidance-notes/guidance-note-course-design-including-learning-outcomes-and-assessment)
but for most educators is also about deeply held ideals about education as the
pursuit of knowledge and truth, as well as what it means to give a good (or bad)
grade.

Maybe you don't care, or at least you don't care enough to re-jig your whole
class to "defend" against students using ChatGPT to submit work that they don't
understand. I think that's an ok position to take for now, while other educators
do try and fail and we learn from each others experiences in how best to
incorporate these tools in our classrooms. But you should at least think hard
about "why do I set that particular essays as the final assessment item in this
course, and what would it mean if a student used ChatGPT to write it?"

Secondly, there are already some good ideas floating around about how to use
ChatGPT productively in your teaching. This isn't just if you're designing a new
course on "Applied AI Language Models", there are ways to incorporate it into an
existing course as well. The Centre for Learning and Teaching at Washington
University has already got a helpful [ChatGPT and AI Composition
Tools](https://ctl.wustl.edu/resources/chatgpt-and-ai-composition-tools/) page
up on their website. There are a [bunch of folks experimenting with
ChatGPT-designed syllabi](https://twitter.com/search?q=chatgpt%20syllabus), too.

I think that people like Yoav Goldberg are on the right track when [they say
things like](https://twitter.com/yoavgo/status/1602026029979164675)

> "actually now that i think of it more, i think a "write an essay with the help
> of chatGPT and discuss the process and the resulting prose" can be a
> super-effective assignment also in a humanities-centric, critical-ai program."

If you're wondering how you might incorporate ChatGPT into your class this
coming semester, look at all the times over the semester to produce a written
artefact in response to some sort of question or prompt. Can you tweak it so
that the student (or students) asks that question of ChatGPT and have to
critically reflect on the output they recieve from the AI model. This process
could be scaffolded by first doing it in a facilitated class discussion setting,
but then later as an assessment task (and perhaps the students need to create
their own rubric or criteria on which the output of the AI model should be
evaluated). There are heaps of variations on this, but the general idea is this:
wherever in your current class you ask your students to write something, that's
an opportunity to get the student to co-write (or evaluate) something the with
ChatGPT. On a superficial level this sort of "AI tool use" is the sort of
process that knowledge workers will increasingly be incorporating into our daily
workflows. And at a deeper level it's an opportunity to reflect on where these
tools work well, where they're useless, and where they might be actively
harmful.

One final point which I made to my colleague in the context of incorporating
ChatGPT into this semesters's class is about availability. During the [current
initial research preview ChatGPT is free to
use](https://help.openai.com/en/articles/6783457-chatgpt-faq). But OpenAI
(creators of ChatGPT) haven't released any information about how long this
research preview window will last, or how much it'll cost when that window
ends.

ChatGPT running costs are [estimated at $3m USD per
month](https://twitter.com/tomgoldsteincs/status/1600196995389366274), and
OpenAI are a private company, so they can't necessarily be counted on to keep it
running free forever as a public good. If it's priced similarly to GPT3 (the AI
Language Model on which it's based) then it's fairly cheap---probably only a few
cents to write an article as long as this one---but you're still left with an
equity issue unless you're willing to pay for a subscription for all your
students. Even if your institution is willing, these tools don't yet have an
easy way to do things like sign up a whole class, ensuring that student's activity stays
under a given budget $100, and send one easy bill. I'm sure that will come in
time, and AI companies may well be willing to offer partnerships and
scholarships with educational institutions doing this sort of thing, but be
prepared for a small panic if ChatGPT's free trial gets turned off 24 hours
before an assessment deadline.

I'm not trying to downplay the potential impacts of ChatGPT in higher education
and say "everything's gonna be fine". These tools might [blow up
society](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/15/opinion/ai-chatgpt-lobbying-democracy.html),
and higher education is (clearly!) not going to be unaffected if that happens.
My main point is that you can start using them in the classroom today---your
students will be anyway, and this way you get to go on that journey with them.
There will be some challenges, and you might have to ask yourself some deep
questions about why your class is designed the way it is. But it is a pretty
exciting chance to be part of a community of educators figuring it out together,
and whatever conclusions we come to I do strongly believe that we need to learn
how to live in a world of AI-generated bullshit, so why _wouldn't_ we set our
students up to start that learning journey with us while they're in our
classrooms?
